Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com
from hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
all weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number 526. In this episode,
Scott talks with software developer
and development manager, Louise Elliott
about punishment driven development. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes today on the phone.
I've got Louise Elliott. She's
a software development manager and
the finance industry works at
the Leeds building society. And
you've been in the software
world for what, 25 years.
And you've done done it
all development manager, technical manager
architect. Absolutely. Yeah, I love
the technical industry. It actually
took me a long time
to get into management. I
fought it for a long
time, but I love it.
And now I'm here. Okay.
So, so as a manager
and someone who's got, we
have very similar backgrounds. I
worked in finance and did
credit unions. And what, what
you call building societies for
many, many years. And I
did things like TDD and
BDD and all the different
driven developments, but you've got
a really interesting perspective on
kind of development. And what
is that? That's punishment driven
development. I obviously would have
loved to have called it
blame driven development, but apparently
be DDS already used. So
punishment driven development is this
like, you know, death marches.
And This is just what
I see everywhere in the
industry, even with things like
Hatchell and other ways of
working where we're supposed to
be moving on and doing
things in a new way,
I still see punishment. I've
got a kids and I
don't mean to necessarily equate
children to developers, but you
know, we've all ran teams.
Punishment. Doesn't always work though.
I mean, is it really
a motivator? Is it going
to get people up in
the morning and send them
into work? Well, I think
probably not actually, but yet
we see it all the
time. You know, I think
one of the main reasons
that people punish people in
the workplace is really around
retribution. It seems more about
it's going to make me
feel better to punish them
than it is about actually
creating behavioral change. The only
thing I see it creating
as a climate where people
are not willing to take
risks, don't feel it's safe
to fail and that's not
good for any organization. Is
it because where we taught
this, or when are we
going to learn that, that,
that, you know, punitive type
behaviors are not our de
motivators? I don't know that
most of the time people
care that is de-motivating other
people. I think say it's
about making them feel superior
happier at the time it's
about them. So, you know,
something goes wrong in life
and your manager immediately asks
who's to blame for that.
It's about finding who is
it that we can say
is to blame that we
can punish. And then we
can forget about it and
move on rather than trying
to actually understand the systematic
issues and solve those behavior
changes. So the system changes
in order to make sure
this doesn't happen again. It's
kind of lazy management style,
But at the same time,
I know that I have
been, I wouldn't say accused
of, but I have been
at fault when I've said,
I want accountability and I've
used the word accountability, maybe
as a euphemism for blaming,
like, I don't necessarily want
to hurt someone, but someone
needs to be accountable for
this, this mistake or this
thing that has, you know,
caused our projects, such, such,
such pain. Am I wrong
to want that? What do
you want out of that?
What are you getting from?
What do I want out
of that? I want it
to never happen again. I
want you, no one wants
competence. So sometimes people use
punishment and accountability as a
way of encouraging competence. So,
okay. So if they made
a mistake, if it was
truly a mistake and then
not somebody makes mistakes, then
punishing, it will make absolutely
no difference because they didn't
choose to do it was
only interim state. And at
some point in future, they
may make that mistake again.
And there's nothing that they
call a different States, but
there's nothing that they can
do to choose if there's
a behavioral issue here and
maybe they're not taking enough
care in the scenario and
they're consistently not taking them
while again, just saying you're
accountable for, does that actually
get you where you want
to be, or actually sitting
with them and discussing what
behavior you really want from
them and what you see,
how it's different from what
you'd like it to be
in discussing with them, why
that, and working with them
on changing that will actually
get you just saying you're
accountable and I'm going to
make it. Hmm. Now when
you say that and I
forgive me, I am, unfortunately
I'm putting all of this
into the context of my,
my young children, because you've
just described a parenting style
or a management style that
has the luxury of time.
And I've had conversations with
my wife before where I've
said, you know, Hey, we
really ought to sit down
with the eight year old
and have a conversation about
our expectations. And she'll say,
I don't have time for
that today. What I need
from you now is compliance.
Meaning the child, like stop
taking food onto the couch.
You always spill the food.
Now. Yes. If I had
a half an hour, I'd
sit down or an hour
and have a whole conversation
about here's how it makes
me feel. But when you're
on a project and you
really need to get that
project shipping, you can't, you
can't baby, for lack of
a better word, you can't
baby anybody. So how do
you find that balance? Well,
I'm not saying that you
never have to be directive
in your management style. That
doesn't mean that doesn't mean
that you need to punish
it's sometimes when things were
agenda, you may be very
specific about exactly what you
need and who you need
it from. That's not punishment,
but if you actually want
to change that behavior in
the longer term, if you're
actually not facing an immediate
emergency. So from a child,
if I have my niece
once run away from my
mom, when we were taking
her out, she was very
young and we got full
and she ran away and
we couldn't find her. And
when we did find her,
my mom's smacked her legs
immediately without even thinking. And
then got very worried that
my sister was gonna find
out, but my niece needed
that. That was a dangerous
thing that I needed to
remember not to do that.
And that, that age, that's
quite a hard thing to
sit and explain and discuss.
Whereas she remembered that her
very upset with her for
doing that. And that that
was an accident. So I'm
not saying that punishment never
has a role. And certainly
in the upbringing of children,
there's a whole nother thing.
I'm not a parent. I'm
not even gonna go there,
but Parallels of course, running
a team, running a team,
running a family are very
similar, But these people are
not children. These people's brains,
fully grown adults. And I
think that's one of the
huge issues that we face
in a lot of industry.
When people assume that they
need to treat children, this
is all about respect. This
is all about starting your
assumption that this person trying
to do the best job.
Absolutely. You know, they, this
person is not deliberately causing
you problems. And if they
are, then that conversation really
does need to happen. One
of the things that managers
I think are really bad
at is there are two
things. One is obviously an
incredibly unpleasant experience. I'm very
lucky. My career I've only
had to do it once.
The other is the, is
having to manage. It's a
really hard thing to do
without blame, because blame, isn't
helpful in understanding why coming
up with an agreement with
the person, how that's going
to be handled, working with
them to do. Ideally you
get into a place where
that's been addressed. It's actually,
it takes time and it
is hard. But as a
manager, that's your job. Your
job is not to go
and sit in meetings all
the time, which is what
my diary seems to be.
It's actually to enable the
team to do the job
that they're there to do.
And if that means understanding,
what's stopping them, irrespective of
whether that's a technical thing,
that's stopping them a lack
of a resource somewhere, or
whether it's actually the fact
that they don't understand what
it is that you need
from them. A lot of
managers get really frustrated and
say, well, it's obvious they
should have escalate to me.
But if you've never sat
down with that person and
said, these are the circumstances
I need you to escalate
to me. When you sit
in the fact that they're
not doing, and just assume
that they can read your
mind and know what you
think This is really useful.
This is really useful. Let
me ask you about two
specific scenarios that I've experienced.
And you tell me if
I was punishing or if
the person was punishing or
not. Because I think that
these are very common scenarios.
Now there is a product
that you can buy and
you can, you've seen this
a lot around continuous integration,
which is the light that
flashes when the build is
broken, I've heard it called
the siren of shame. You
know, it's the, you know,
it's the big kind of
like either a traffic robot
or a big siren that
goes and fires off. And
it makes noise. If so-and-so,
you know, broke the build
and I've seen people have
lots of fun online with,
you know, hacking these things.
So it'll actually talk, right?
The Lee's broke the build.
Now I think that there
could be theoretically, a healthy
culture that would be, would
have fun with that. And
no one would feel particularly
shamed, but at the same
time, you don't really know,
right? You could a team
of 10 and two of
them really take that personally
and feel like this is
an unhealthy culture where the
other eight have quite a
light philosophy. Is that fun
company culture or is that
punishment and shaming? I think
it's punishment and shaming. If
people in the team feel
that way, but if the
whole team find it fun,
then it's a really good
path culture. The team's not
going to split the one
or two people who don't
like it feel comfortable enough
to say this is not
okay. But if you're a
good manager or good reader
of people, you shouldn't be
able to tell that people
are not happy with that.
You know, this isn't about
what people are willing to
tell you. And if they
don't come to you and
say it, then it doesn't
matter in the same way
that if you're in a
meeting with the team and
you've got some quiet and
then you behave differently with
them to try and get
them to contribute where other
members of the team, you
probably don't need to do
anything at all to get
them to contribute. You just
use different techniques. I view
a really important role of
somebody who is leading a
team to be know the
people, know the individuals, understand
what they want to meet.
It's not about how you
want to lead the team,
but actually how those individuals,
what do they need from
you? So my second example,
my second question is when,
what I ended up instituting,
when people broke, the build
was a pretty straightforward consequent
consequence, driven development, right? Natural
consequences, we call it, which
is you broke the build.
You fixed the build. If
you're able to, we used
to have scenarios where I
remember one particular scenario where
a gentlemen broke the build,
didn't know it went home,
you know, three o'clock on
a Friday afternoon. And I
called the person and I
said, I'm sorry, you need
to turn around. And you
need to fix this built
breaking the bill on Friday
nights is not okay. Some
people felt that was a
punishment. I felt that was
a very, very clear natural
consequence because it would block
everyone from working all weekend.
I think as long as
people know and have agreed
in the team, the engagement
with the team, so people
understand the consequences of breaking
means that they need to
fix that. And also that
the team is enough of
a team that they don't
want the rest of the
team not to go to
work on the weekend, but
actually they take this as
a responsibility that they have,
and that's not punishment, but
it is important that it
is agreed and understood within
the team rather than it
just suddenly appearing. I see.
So the difference in all
of these scenarios that I've
described is expectations and understanding.
Absolutely. And also as far
as possible, setting that way
of working, setting their own
rules for engagement within the
team, rather than it being
imposed by the manager, Right?
Bringing it down on high,
makes it feel even more
like punishment. Absolutely. Rather than
actually being about this is
our commitment to each of
those team members. This episode
of Hansel minutes is brought
to you by brain tree
payments. By next year, maybe
even next week, there could
be a whole new way
to pay. Maybe it will
be the next Bitcoin or
the next Apple pay. Maybe
even both fortunately brain tree's
full stack payment platform is
easily adaptable to whatever the
future holds. So you can
adapt easily to, you can
accept everything from pounds to
PayPal, to that next big
innovation from any device with
one integration. And when that
new payment method comes out,
all you have to do
is update a few lines
of code no late nights,
no complicated recoding, no stress
about staying ahead of the
curve. Braintree payments is here
to help. You can learn
more@braintreepayments.com slash Hanselman that's Braintree
payments.com/hanselman. SDK is available in
lots of languages, including.net, node,
Java, Perl, and Python, Ruby,
check it out. So backing
up a little bit and
taking this in a different
direction. You had said that
when punishment is being the
primary motivator within development, it's
really not about the punished
it's about the Punisher and
what that's doing to them
is it, is it changing
their brain? There are the
two people who are more
likely to drive development teams
like this. Yeah, there was
a study last year that
came out that actually looked
at how, whether different people
have more propensity to punish
than other people did. Well,
they actually found was that
if they quieten down certain
areas of the prefrontal cortex,
people wanted to punish less
than when that area was
more active. And this was
a really interesting study. They
asked the question, should we
actually task, make judging, punish
for a living such as
judges and decided to see
how suitable they are to
be a judge in our
society. But I would actually
take that into any kind
of area where people are
able, I guess, and have
a forum for other people
and could choose to punish
in the workplace and say,
is that person doing that?
Because they have very high
activity in that area of
their brain. Are they suitable
for that kind of work
and that kind of job?
What kind of impact are
they going to have on
everybody else in the organization?
Whenever I hear like suitable,
then I feel like, you
know, who am I to
judge? You know, like who
judges the judges? You know,
there could be biological reasons.
There are like that. That
could be historical reasons. There
could be all sorts of
reasons why someone's like that.
It gets into all the
dishes around company culture and
who fits and who doesn't.
And it's such a slippery
slope. Yeah, true. You know,
the company called try working
right now is actually quite
hierarchical, but we are very
deliberately trying to engender change
in that culture. And so
is there some punishment around,
in my culture right now?
Yes. Do we get some
questions around who's to blame
when things go wrong? Yes
we do. But going back
in actually questioning blame at
the point that it's starting
to be talked about has
a really good impact. And
actually people go, Oh yeah,
you're right. When you touch,
you look at what's going
wrong and why it's gone
wrong and stopping that happening
again, rather than actually trying
to find the person to
play. And corporate cultures can
be changed. It's hard and
it takes a long time,
but it can happen with
the right support. But if
you have somebody whose brain
is just super active in
Sarah and they just want
to punish, and they get
a lot of pleasure from
doing that, then I would
argue, they're probably just not
suitable for that type of
job. And hopefully we discover
this before it's too late.
Well ideally, or maybe we
can give them one of
these electromagnetic coils around the
head that dampens down the
area of that, right? Like
we have a special hat
And this is not a
joke. This is a really
a thing. This is absolutely
a study that came out
last year that found this
to be the case. I'm
trying to think of there's
people in our lives or
in our governments that perhaps
may need some of these
things. Most of the time.
I think it's learned behavior.
When you have a manager
who's only ever worked in
a hierarchical organization, who's had
a boss who's maybe very
bullying, but only management style
data ever scene. So it's
very likely to be the
way that they deal with
people, even if that's not
their natural way of being.
I think most of the
time just talking sense and
explaining and showing more powerfully
than anything else that changes
in behavior, which can be
achieved when what you're doing
is working with people and
not demanding. Of course, you
lost me at talking sense
into the managers, but I
was with you up until
then. So let's think a
little bit more about this
so that there are people's
brains might be different. They
may be, they may have
things that caused them to
want to punish, but you,
you had a number of
reasons. You had an enumeration
of reasons why one might
punish. So yeah, that there
are reasons why people might
want to punish other people.
So one of them is
to stop that person doing
the same thing again. So
if that's your reason for
punishing, then it has to
be that it was their
choice to do it so
that you are stopping them
from doing that again. So
something like a mistake. So
a malicious, some, some specific
thing that they did to
sabotage, Or maybe they did
something, not knowing that it
wasn't acceptable and then you
punish them. And now they
know it's not acceptable. Won't
do it again. Or maybe
they were just pushing at
the edges. The next reason
is to stop other people
from doing so if you
punish somebody very, so let's
say they make a mistake.
It's in life. They get
their salary dog. Everybody else
knows that's happened. Then they
won't do that. No one
else is gonna do that
again. That seems that people
are choosing to do that
thing. And that it isn't
just a mistake. The third
one is just for retribution
because it feels good person
doing the punishing. It feels
like and deserves to be
punished and I'm punishing. And
the final one is where
you have something that's actually
affected an individual. You might
punish somebody in order to
compensate victims and you might
find somebody and give the
money to the person who
actually had the bad effect
of whatever the activity box.
I would argue that the
vast majority of the time
in the workplace, when people
punish you, it's actually for
reasons of retribution, because it
feels like a good thing
to do rather than to
change the behavior, to look
why those situations happened and
how it can avoid. So
thinking about how to avoid
having things happen. Again, I
hope that people who are
listening are thinking that they've
either maybe worked at a
company like this before, or
maybe, you know, God forbid
they are in a company
like that. Right now, I
wrote about fear-driven development a
while back. And it resonated
with a lot of people.
I think when we, we,
we find that, wait a
second, she's she's talking about
my organization. What do we
do, though? If we are
downstream, how do you, if
you're living in a fear-driven
or punishment driven environment, how
do you, how do you
save yourself? Other than, I
don't know that there is
an easy way to do
that. I think maybe quitting
is the way to go
in the organization. I mean,
the thing that makes the
biggest difference is the fact
that the CIO is very
people oriented. So the previous
CIO mostly not, was far
less search for the currency.
I was very people oriented
and he wants to make
this change in culture. And
that means that anybody lowers
stream, who also wants to
make that changing culture has
a champion and can say
to people, I don't think
we should be doing it
this way, because there's support
higher level. But without that
support, higher level is an
incredibly difficult thing to do.
Yeah. Yeah. The way that
we phrase it at my
company is we call it
executive air cover. If you're
going into, you know, to
a fight, do you have
air cover at the, at
some level that is reasonably
high, especially if it's a
policy type of a change,
you really need a champion,
don't you? Yeah, definitely. You
know, at the end of
the day, you have to
look at organizations, ask, do
they fit you in who
you are as an individual?
I'm part of that is
how do you look to
be treated? How do you
deserve to be treated? And
do they treat you that
way? And when they don't,
can you have a reasonable
conversation with them about, and
do they treat other people
that way? That matters to
me. So I have values
around people being respected around
openness and honesty. If I'm
in a management chain and
I'm asked to keep something
secret for anything other than
that, doesn't sound like a
good reason. If they can't
give me a reason to
keep it secret, then I
looked absolutely challenged because it
goes against what I think.
And if I was working
at an organization where that
was happening all the time,
I would leave because my
core values would not be
in sync. Hmm. So when
we talk about fit and
culture fit and company fit,
it really is about values.
More than anything like that.
Those are the reasons to
join a company and to
quit a company. Absolutely. If
I go for an interview
and organization, I have lots
and lots of questions because
I want to know, is
this an organization I want
to work? And the older
I get, the more it
matters to me. I think
maybe the more choice I
have about, but when I
was younger, it was just,
yay. I've been offered a
job. Now it's very much
do I want to work?
Is this somewhere where I
can make a difference where
I'm going to feel comfortable,
where they do something that
I care about? So the
organization I worked for right
now is mutual. It's owned
by its customers. There aren't
any shareholders. And that is
really important to me. And
it's one of the things
that makes me engaged. And
it was one of the
I was looking for when
I left was that level
of caring. And as such,
you, you, you, as a
manager now are not driving
development through punishment. What is
your motivator for, for your
people who work for you?
I guess it's still PDD,
but it's people That's a
PDD week. I think we
can, we can do it.
It's totally empowerment is totally,
you know, this is an
organization where, when I joined
more than 10 years, really
unusual scenario, I've not seen
it elsewhere in my career.
And it was very inward.
So there are a number
of things that weren't done
that are pretty standard in
the industry now. So things
like continuous integration, anything that
they did automate automated testing
that they did. And we
do those things now, and
we've moved on and doing
those through people, getting engaged
and understanding, wanting to do
those things rather than through
dictate of you will do
these things. It's more of
getting people excited around it.
One of the things I
love about where I work
at the moment, it says
some little resistance to change.
People have done something this
way for so long, but
they love a better way
of doing it. You know,
I am sitting here doing
my job. I can make
so much difference. And that's
because of the people who
work the culture and the
fact that they really want
to do things as best
as they can for the
members of the organization. And,
you know, it's, it's such
an enabling culture. Yeah. That
sounds like, like power driven
development in the context of
empowerment. You like that you
can have that one for
free. Well, thank you so
much for chatting with me
today. Thank you. I've thoroughly
enjoyed it, Louise Elliot. And
you can find her online
and talking about punishment driven
development. This has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see you again next week.